So I'm gonna start with
a little example dataset here.
This dataset comes with
the ggplot2 package,
so you can always just load it up
after you install the package.
And so this is the mpg dataset.
It looks at miles per gallon for
a variety of different types of cars, and
you can see in this data set from the stir
that I did, that there's 234 observations,
so there's 234 different types of cars.
And there are 11 variables
that are measured.
In particular, I'm gonna be looking
at the displacement variable,
which is an indicator of
how large the engine is.
So this is the displ variable.
We're gonna be looking at
the number of cylinders and
we're gonna look at the highway mileage,
so the hwy variable, and
then we're gonna look at the drv variable
which is what kind of drive it is,
is it a four-wheel drive,
a front-wheel drive or a rear-wheel drive?
So notice how the factors here
are labeled appropriately.
So, for example, the manufacturer variable
is labeled by the manufacturer of the car,
Audi, Chevrolet, etc.
And then the drv variable, which indicates
the type of the drive, is indicated with
a four for four-wheel drive, f for
front-wheel, and r for rear-wheel.
So a very simple plot you can make,
I call this the hello world for ggplot,
is to call the qplot function.
On the x-axis I have this displacement
variable, which is the kind of engine size
variable, and then on the y-axis
I got the highway mileage.
And you can see that I specify the data
frame with the data argument, so
I say data equals mpg, so did the data
comes from this mpg data frame?
And so that's very simple.
You can see that the plot that it makes
looks very different from the traditional
base plot.
You see there's kind of a gray background,
and there's white grid lines behind it.
The points are closed, solid circles,
rather than the typical open circles
from the base plotting system.
And then there are labels on the x and
the y axis.
One of the things we can do is
modify some of the aesthetics.
So we can highlight different
subgroups of the data.
So one of the subgroups
can be determined by, so
there's lots of different cars here.
Some of them are front-wheel drive,
some of them are rear-wheel drive, and
some of them are four-wheel drive.
So we can separate those observations out
by looking at the drv, the drive variable.
And so I've specified the x and
y coordinates just like before.
I specified the data
frame just like before.
And then another argument I
have is the color variable.
And I'm gonna say that the color is
mapped to this drive variable, drv.
And all that says is that the different
levels of the drive variable
will be each assigned a different color.
And notice I don't specify
what those colors are,
they're specified automatically.
So you can see on this new plot here that
the front-wheel drive cars are in green,
the rear-wheel drive cars are in blue,
and the four-wheel drive cars are in red.
And so you can see that most of
the front-wheel drives tend to have
the highest mileage, the four-wheel drive
tends to have the lowest mileage, and
the rear-wheel drive is
something in the middle.
And I noticed that the legend was
placed on the plot automatically and
the color coding the different
levels of the factor variable.
I didn't have to do anything special.
And so it's very nicely organized and
thought out, and
you don't have to do anything.
Everything is done automatically.
Another thing that you sometimes
want to add is a statistic.
So a statistic is just
some summary of the data.
And so the summary that we've chosen
to add here is is a kind of smoother or
the more technical name is called low S,
and it smooths the data.
So you can see the overall
trend in the data set,
and you can see that I do this
by adding the geom argument,
and the geoms that I wanna put on
this plot are these two types.
One is I wanna add the points themselves,
so I can see the data,
and then I wanna add a smooth geom.
And the smooth is this blue
line that goes across, and
the 95% confidence intervals for
that line are indicated by the gray zone.
You can make a Histogram
with the qplot function,
by only specifying a single variable.
So here I only specify
the highway variable.
And it shows me the highway mileage for
all the cars in the data set.
But then again,
I like to kind of separate out
which cars are four-wheel drive,
which cars are front-wheel drive, etc.
So again, I specify it.
Instead of the color argument,
I specify the fill argument.
Which says the different elements of
the Histograms are gonna be filled
with different colors,
based on what drive they are.
So, here you can see a similar
picture that you saw before,
which is that the four-wheel drive
vehicles tend to have the lowest mileage.
And the four-wheel drive tend
to have the highest mileage.
Another feature of ggplot
is called facets, and
facets are like panels in lattice.
The idea is that you can
create separate plots,
which indicate, again, subsets of your
data indicated by a factor variable.
And you can make a panel of plots to
look at separate subsets together.
So, one option to be to color code
the subsets according to different colors,
like we did before.
But if you have a lot of data points,
that can be tricky to look at, and then
all of the colors might overlap and it
may difficult to see the separate groups.
So an easier way to do that is to say,
split out the three groups into separate
panels and make three separate plots.
So that is what we've done here.
On the left side here,
I've got three different scatter plots of
the displacement versus
the highway mileage, and then
I've split it out by the different drives,
so four-wheel drive, front, and rear.
And so you can see the relationship for
these three sub groups, and it's just
a different way to look at the data rather
than, say, color coding the three groups.
And I specify this with
the facets variable.
The fastest variable takes
a format that's basically
a variable on the left-hand side and
a variable on the right-hand side.
And they're separated by a tilde.
And so
the variable on the right-hand side,
determines the columns of the panels.
And the variable on the left-hand side
indicates the rows of this kind of
matrix here.
Now notice that in the left plot,
which is outlined by the red box,
there's only one row.
And so,
there's no variable that indicates how
many rows there should be in this plot.
And so that's why in the facets argument,
I have a dot on the left-hand side.
On the right-hand side,
I've got the drv variable,
which indicates how many columns.
And now, because there are three
levels to this drv variable,
there are gonna be three columns.
And so, since there's only one row,
there's gonna be three plots
all in a row like that.
On the right-hand side in this plot
that's outlined with the blue box,
I've got three histograms.
And notice that I've put the drv
variable on the left-hand
side of the facets argument now, so
that indicates I want three separate rows.
Because there's nothing on the right-hand
side of the tilde, I have no columns, so
I just have the one column.
No extra columns, I just have
the one column for the three plots.
And now I've got the three histograms.
You can look at the highway mileage
divided up by the three groups.
So, that's a quick example
using the Q plot function,
using some of the data
in the ggplot package.
I want to go through a slightly
more involved example,
using the data set that comes from here,
from Johns Hopkins.
So this comes from the Mouse Allergen and
Asthma Cohort Study, which is a study
conducted here at Johns Hopkins of
Baltimore children, aged five to 17.
These children all had persistent asthma,
with an exacerbation in the past year.
And the overall goal of the study was to
study the indoor environment, so the home
environment of these children, and
its relationship with asthma morbidity.
So if you're interested in seeing
what a little bit of this was about,
we have a recent publication and
I give the link here.
So here's a little bit of the MAACS data.
You can see that obviously
there are 750 observations and
I just put five variables here for
the sake of demonstration.
One is the id variable.
The second one is the eNO.
So, exhaled nitric oxide is
a measurement that we take.
Roughly it corresponds to a level
of pulmonary inflammation, so
a large value of eNO indicates
some pulmonary inflammation.
The secondary variable here that I want
to highlight is fine particulate matter.
So this is dust that is less
than 2.5 microns in diameter.
So it's very fine dust.
And the last variable I want to point out
here is these mouse positive variables.
So this is a skin test
that the children do,
which tells us whether they're
allergic to mouse allergen or not.
So, here's a basic histogram
of exhaled nitric oxide.
So this is the log of
exhaled nitric oxide.
And you can see it has kind
of an interesting shape.
It looks like there's two peaks or
maybe even three peaks there,
as you go across the histogram.
At the bottom of the plot here, I've
got the code that makes this histogram,
in case you're wondering how you make it.
And so I use the key plot
function to make the histogram.
So now I've made another histogram, but
I've color coded the different groups, and
the groups are determined by
this mouse positive variable.
So I've separated out the people who are
kind of sensitized to mouse allergen and
the people who are not sensitized.
So you can think of the children that
are sensitized to mouse allergen are more
allergic and they may be more sensitive
to a variety of environmental triggers.
And so
you can see that roughly from the data,
the blue bars are slightly higher and
the red bars tend to be slightly lower.
So that suggests that the children
there are mouse positive have
slightly higher pulmonary
inflammation on average.
Another way to visualize this
data is to do a density smooth.
So you can see that on the left-hand side,
I add the geom density to
this log(eno) variable.
You can see there are at least two
peaks from the density smooth, and
if you separate those peaks out,
on the right-hand side,
notice I say color equals mopos.
So I split out the colors by whether
they're positive to mouse allergen or not.
And you can see that the two peaks roughly
correspond to whether they're allergic to
mouse allergen or not.
And so, this is a nice way to visualize
this kind of one-dimensional data.
Now, if we want to look
at some scatter plots,
I want to see whether exhaled nitric
oxide is related to the level of fine
particulate matter in the home, and
so I'm gonna look at PM2.5 eNO.
On the very left most side here, I just
make a simple scatter plot of log(eno) and
then log(pm25), and
it's a little difficult to see exactly
what the relationship might be,
but we'll go piece by piece here.
In the middle plot here,
I've made the same scatter plot, but
I've separated the two groups, or
the mouse positive and the mouse, so
the non-allergic and the allergic children
are separated by different shapes.
So here I specified the shape argument,
and
I assigned the shape to be
this mouse positive variable.
Now, it's not really easy to see,
the two groups here.
So there's one ground that's triangles and
another group that's circles, and
because of the overlapping of the points,
it's a little hard to see.
So in the right-hand side here, instead
of separating the two groups by shapes,
I separated them by color, and
it's a little bit easier to see the two
different groups in this plot now.
One of the things you can do is to smooth
the relationship between a log PM2.5 and
log eNO, and
I wanna look at how this relationship
is different in the two groups.
So I set the geom to be a point and
a smooth, and
rather than use low S, I'm just gonna
use a standard linear regression model.
So I say method equals LM.
And that way I can look at the linear
relationship between PM2.5 and
eNO by whether they
are allergic to mouse or not.
And you can see that, roughly speaking,
in the non-allergic children, so
amongst the red dots here.
There's a little bit of
a negative relationship but
it's not particularly strong, if you
factor in the confidence intervals there.
And then within the allergic children,
there appears to be an increasing
relationship between PM2.5 and eNO
So, another way to look at the same
data is to split it out with facets.
So rather than overlapping the two groups
and then color-coding them separately,
I can just split them out into two
plots using the facets argument.
So here I specify the facets argument and
I say I want two columns,
designated by the mouse positive variable.
So no and yes, and so
it'll be two columns.
And then I smooth the relationship
within each panel,
and you can see that again it's the same
story amongst the mouse negative children,
there's a small decreasing relationship.
And amongst the mouse positive children,
there's a slight increasing relationship.
So the qplot function is a simple function
that you can use to make very quick plots.
And it's analogous to the plot function,
so you specify x, y,
you specify your data, and then there's
a variety of options that you can choose.
There are a lot of nice built-in features,
so if you wanna color code subsets
of the data, it's very easy to do.
If you wanna split out different panels,
that's also very easy
to do with the facets.
You can choose different plotting
symbols with the shape argument.
And so, it has a lot of nice things
that you can do very quickly,
but they are still very powerful.
The syntax of of the function is somewhere
in between kind of the base plotting and
the lattice package.
I think the graphics that
are produced are very nice,
if you like that type of design.
But if you don't,
if there are features you don't like, or
you don't like the design of
this particular function.
It's a little bit tricky to kind of modify
the qplot function to suit your needs.
If you wanna do a lower level
customization of different aspects
of the plot, you really have to go into
the guts of the ggplot function, and
that's something that I'll talk
about in the next lecture.